GND.MD, before:

# GND Format Specification

## Overview

GND files contain the entirety of a map's static geometry (i.e., the ground/terrain). It doesn't include objects and the water plane, which are stored as part of the RSW file instead.

## Prerequisites

In order to understand the GND file format, some familiarity with the following concepts is required:

* [Polygon meshes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polygon_mesh), used to represent objects in 3D space
* The [Flyweight Design Pattern](https://gameprogrammingpatterns.com/flyweight.html) can help to reduce space usage by avoiding redundancy
* [Geometry Instancing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geometry_instancing), a related concept that similarly helps to avoid redundancy
* [Lightmaps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lightmap), a standard way to use precomputed lighting and improve rendering performance
* [Posterization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Posterization), an effect of reducing the number of colors which is applied to the lightmap texture

## Ground Mesh

The ground mesh is a static object that represents the ground (or terrain) of each map. It is the defining part of the GND file and consists chiefly of geometry to which diffuse textures, color highlights and lightmap textures are applied.

### Reconstruction

Recreating the terrain involves a complex set of operations; It is stored in a memory-efficient format and therefore not directly compatible with how modern rendering hardware expects 3D objects to be described.

To this end, we must first understand the three components that form the basic building blocks of the game world.

#### Tiles, Cubes, and Surfaces (Oh my!)

RO uses tiles as the basic unit of measurement for game logic, but its world actually consists of surfaces larger than that, which are part of what you could call "cubes" (boxes). These boxes are combined like a jigsaw puzzle to form the actual terrain.

Each surface of a cube is 2x2 tiles large (**TODO: Are there any exceptions to this rule?**) and may be textured or not. There's no direct reference to the tiles as defined in the world coordinate system, but rather surfaces/cubes are combined in a predefined order (bottom/left to top/right).

Cubes are defined by only three surfaces (TOP, NORTH, EAST). In order to realize the BOTTOM, SOUTH and WEST sides, the adjacent cube's TOP, NORTH and EAST surface are used, respectively.

Since this process is somewhat convoluted, more details are given below.

##### Tiles

As previously mentioned, [tiles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tile) are the basic building block for the terrain, so in a way RO could be described as a [tile-based game](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tile-based_game). It's not technically accurate, but that's definitely how the end result is perceived. Characters are positioned (at the center) on a tile, map coordinates refer to the tile and everything that requires thinking about positions usually works with the tile as the smallest unit... except when it comes to rendering.

In practical terms, the actual size of each tile, as rendered on the screen,depends on the scale of the world, camera zoom level and screen resolution. However, it's the baseline for measuring distance in the world coordinate system, where one unit of distance can be expressed in "number of tiles".

As far as textures are concerned, a texture appears to fit on a single tile if its dimensions are 32 pixels, as can easily be seen by checking the size of the ["grid selector"](https://i.imgur.com/GBuVjXe.png) texture rendered on top of the currently selected tile.

##### Surfaces

Surfaces are the visible areas containing tiles. The entirety of the map's geometry is made out of surfaces, which can be textured or "invisible" and as far as I can tell, each surface contains exactly four tiles (two in each dimension).

This is mostly of relevance for texturing, since texture slices usually are 64 pixels wide, so larger surfaces that appear seamless in the game are frequently pieced together by individual surfaces to give the appearance of a continuous textured plane (and they're indeed rendered similarly). Unfortunately this can cause problems if texture coordinates aren't applied correctly (and sometimes even if they are), which is why there are visible "gaps" in the terrain that can be seen at the right camera angle and distance.

##### Cubes

Generally speaking, the terrain is defined by a heightmap indicating the positions of all four corners for any given tile. Each chunk of the heightmap (2x2 tiles) is sometimes called cube, which implies the presence of up to 6 surfaces: Two for the top and bottom of the cube, two to either side, and two to the front and back, where of course any number of them could be missing.

Now, the reason the cube metaphor doesn't work perfectly is that each chunk is only defined by *three* surfaces at most: Top, north, and east. If interpreted as surfaces it doesn't really change anything; Since you can express a cube's left (or south)-facing side as the adjacent cube's right (or north)-facing side you get the same effect with a much smaller data structure.

[This visualization](Images/GND_SurfacesVisualization.png) might help understand the implications. In the picture, surfaces are colored as follows:

* Green if they're the TOP tile for a given cube
* Blue if they're NORTH
* Red if they're EAST

What this means is that, counter to intuition, the blue parts to the south of each chunks aren't really the south surface of the respective ground cube, but rather the north one of the neighbouring cube to the south. The "walls" are implicitly defined by the difference in both cubes' height vector and the client renders them according to which of the top tiles is higher, or not at all if the surface's aren't textured.

 A side effect is that the northernmost "cubes" of each map can't have a "northern" wall, nor can the westernmost "cubes" have a wall to the west. This is why every single map has a specially-crafted "border" beyond the actual visible "walls" (if there are any), which are black impassable tiles that are just sitting there and can't usually be seen in the game, as they blend in with the background.

In the GND files, you will merely find each corner's height and the overall scale factor, which is enough to render the geometry. You could do this by translating the positions to world coordinates and normalize the heights so they refer to a cube of width and height 1 (as in, "one unit in world coordinates"), or just make the cubes bigger to account for the scale factor and then "zoom out" farther to get the same perspective.

The geometry is then rendered by simply glueing all the tiles together, and walls are implicitly formed by two tiles that aren't on the same height: If there's a height difference there'll be a plane in between the two tiles; this essentially becomes a "wall" if assigning it a texture. However, this is only done if the neighbouring "cube" is higher or lower and has a textured surface of its own.

### The Normalizing Scale Factor

For whatever reason, the terrain geometry is scaled down (by a factor of ``10``). This value is stored in the GND file and, as far as I can see, is consistent across all files. The implication is a constant scale factor of ``1/5`` that can safely be applied to the ground mesh's proportions.

The actual calculation appears to be as follows:

    normalizingScaleFactor = GND.mapDimensions / GAT.mapDimensions * GND.geometryScaleFactor

Since each GND surface appears to always be two GAT tiles large, and the scale factor is seemingly always set to ten, this nets us:

    normalizingScaleFactor = 1/2 * 10 = 1/5

## Lightmaps

A lightmap is used to add static light and shadow detail to each map, without requiring the client to calculate lighting in real time.

Similarly to the terrain's surface itself, the lightmap texture is sliced into unique parts, and each part must be mapped to the right surface on the assembled ground mesh. [This screenshot](Images/GND_LightmapSlices.png) might give you an idea of what to expect.

The process is otherwise similar to how the actual terrain is formed: Each surface references a slice of the lightmap texture, as well as a part of the regular (diffuse) texture, while each cube references up to three surfaces.

### Buffer Areas and Texture Bleeding

The visible white borders in that screenshot bring us to another phenomenon: Texture bleeding. If all the tiny slices were to be combined seamlessly, there could be visible artifacts from texture bleeding.

To avoid this problem, there's a one-pixel area to the north and east of each texture slice that isn't used directly. It serves to provide a buffer between the adjacent slices and removes or at least reduces the effect when texture filtering is applied.

In [this example](Images/GND_AntiBleedingBufferArea.bmp) I have manually merged two adjacent slices. The green squares mark the borders of the visible portion of each slice, with the areas outside being the "buffer".

> Some devs are still wondering why their shadowmaps look a bit weird. The reason is plain simple:
A lightmap consists (most of the time) of 8x8 tiles, where only the 7x7 pixels in the center are used. Nothing new. However, the tiles are combined into
a large texture. If texture filtering is being applied, then the borders of the different textures interpolate into each other, fatal for colormaps when they
have different colors. This is called texture bleeding. Because of this, Gravity added a padding of 1 pixel to each tile (resulting in 8x8, instead of 7x7)
and filled them with colors that still look nice when they are interpolated.

### Light and Shadow

Lastly, there isn't a single lightmap texture, but rather two: A "color map" that contains static lighting, and a "shadow map" that contains only greyscale data and is used to render shadows.

Example: [Color map](Images/GND_UnwrappedColorMap.png) vs [Shadow map](Images/GND_UnwrappedShadowMap.png)

The "shadow map" must be applied after the lighting calculation to avoid having it blended in with the other light sources, which would cause shadows to appear "washed out" or even invisible, depending on when in the lighting process the colors are multiplied with the shadow/alpha values.

I believe the client might simply use the alpha channel directly and store both in just one texture, since there's just one texture stored in the GND file and the ``/lightmap`` command seems to disable both parts, but this is merely an educated guess.

### Posterization

The client reduces the number of colors when processing the lightmap texture, causing visible artifacts. These are not part of the lightmap itself, but rather introduced deliberately when loading the texture.

I can only speculate as to why such a  "feature" exists, but my guess would be technical limitations or a stylistic choice. Either way, it is possible to render lighting in the way it was originally computed using just the information that's part of the GND file. This smoothes the transition between colors, as can be seen in the following comparison:

* [Here](Images/GND_ColorMapOriginal.png) are the lights of Comodo in their original glory
* And [here](Images/GND_ColorMapPosterized.png) they are again after applying the posterization effect with a "posterization level" (see below) of ``16``

Note the jagged appearance that plays a huge part in giving RO maps their distinctive look.

The effect is achieved by applying the following operation to the RGB values:

    r = (int)(r / LEVEL_COUNT) * LEVEL_COUNT
    g = (int)(g / LEVEL_COUNT) * LEVEL_COUNT
    b = (int)(b / LEVEL_COUNT) * LEVEL_COUNT
    In RO, LEVEL_COUNT is 16.

    For javascript it would be c = floor(c / LEVEL_COUNT) * LEVEL_COUNT;
    where c is each color component

This effectively casts the color value from float to int, reducing the amount of visible colors and thereby introducing the "jagged" transitions in the color gradient.

## Diffuse Colors (AKA Vertex Colors)

In order to give highlights to the terrain without requiring vast amounts of slightly different textures, the client can render specific (solid) colors at the corners of each tile to give this corner (and all adjacent ones) a different hue.

This concept is known as [vertex colors](https://gamedev.stackexchange.com/questions/139059/what-is-a-vertex-color) and it works by submitting additional information for a given point in 3D space that is then used by the hardware/GPU software to color it differently. It was widely used in older games where dynamic lighting wasn't feasible due to technical limitations, and it can have a significant visual impact for barely any effort at all:

Again they massively saved on file size by providing only one color value per tile, which is applied to the bottom left corner (vertex) of each tile and the vertices of all adjacent tiles that happen to be in the same position. With this, one can define colored spots on the corners of the tile grid with very little effort or overhead.

In [this basic rendition of pay_dun00](https://i.imgur.com/HWrzkEE.png) you can see the textured terrain with vertex colors applied (lightmaps, models, etc. are not displayed). They're the "blotches" on the ground, which blend in with the rest of the scene after all other effects are applied and give the terrain a lot of variety while still using a very limited set of textures.

> Each tile can have a diffuse color. This color, however, is not being applied to all four corners of a tile, but only to the bottom left vertex and all vertices that share the same coordinate.
>
## Layout

**TODO: Are there multiple versions? I've only ever seen one**

**TODO: Tables**

Commit message:

GND: Added more details regarding the zoom level (scale factor)

GND.MD, after:

# GND Format Specification

## Overview

GND files contain the entirety of a map's static geometry (i.e., the ground/terrain). It doesn't include objects and the water plane, which are stored as part of the RSW file instead.

## Prerequisites

In order to understand the GND file format, some familiarity with the following concepts is required:

* [Polygon meshes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polygon_mesh), used to represent objects in 3D space
* The [Flyweight Design Pattern](https://gameprogrammingpatterns.com/flyweight.html) can help to reduce space usage by avoiding redundancy
* [Geometry Instancing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geometry_instancing), a related concept that similarly helps to avoid redundancy
* [Lightmaps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lightmap), a standard way to use precomputed lighting and improve rendering performance
* [Posterization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Posterization), an effect of reducing the number of colors which is applied to the lightmap texture

## Ground Mesh

The ground mesh is a static object that represents the ground (or terrain) of each map. It is the defining part of the GND file and consists chiefly of geometry to which diffuse textures, color highlights and lightmap textures are applied.

### Reconstruction

Recreating the terrain involves a complex set of operations; It is stored in a memory-efficient format and therefore not directly compatible with how modern rendering hardware expects 3D objects to be described.

To this end, we must first understand the three components that form the basic building blocks of the game world.

#### Tiles, Cubes, and Surfaces (Oh my!)

RO uses tiles as the basic unit of measurement for game logic, but its world actually consists of surfaces larger than that, which are part of what you could call "cubes" (boxes). These boxes are combined like a jigsaw puzzle to form the actual terrain.

Each surface of a cube is 2x2 tiles large (**TODO: Are there any exceptions to this rule?**) and may be textured or not. There's no direct reference to the tiles as defined in the world coordinate system, but rather surfaces/cubes are combined in a predefined order (bottom/left to top/right).

Cubes are defined by only three surfaces (TOP, NORTH, EAST). In order to realize the BOTTOM, SOUTH and WEST sides, the adjacent cube's TOP, NORTH and EAST surface are used, respectively.

Since this process is somewhat convoluted, more details are given below.

##### Tiles

As previously mentioned, [tiles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tile) are the basic building block for the terrain, so in a way RO could be described as a [tile-based game](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tile-based_game). It's not technically accurate, but that's definitely how the end result is perceived. Characters are positioned (at the center) on a tile, map coordinates refer to the tile and everything that requires thinking about positions usually works with the tile as the smallest unit... except when it comes to rendering.

In practical terms, the actual size of each tile, as rendered on the screen,depends on the scale of the world, camera zoom level and screen resolution. However, it's the baseline for measuring distance in the world coordinate system, where one unit of distance can be expressed in "number of tiles".

As far as textures are concerned, a texture appears to fit on a single tile if its dimensions are 32 pixels, as can easily be seen by checking the size of the ["grid selector"](https://i.imgur.com/GBuVjXe.png) texture rendered on top of the currently selected tile.

##### Surfaces

Surfaces are the visible areas containing tiles. The entirety of the map's geometry is made out of surfaces, which can be textured or "invisible" and as far as I can tell, each surface contains exactly four tiles (two in each dimension).

This is mostly of relevance for texturing, since texture slices usually are 64 pixels wide, so larger surfaces that appear seamless in the game are frequently pieced together by individual surfaces to give the appearance of a continuous textured plane (and they're indeed rendered similarly). Unfortunately this can cause problems if texture coordinates aren't applied correctly (and sometimes even if they are), which is why there are visible "gaps" in the terrain that can be seen at the right camera angle and distance.

##### Cubes

Generally speaking, the terrain is defined by a heightmap indicating the positions of all four corners for any given tile. Each chunk of the heightmap (2x2 tiles) is sometimes called cube, which implies the presence of up to 6 surfaces: Two for the top and bottom of the cube, two to either side, and two to the front and back, where of course any number of them could be missing.

Now, the reason the cube metaphor doesn't work perfectly is that each chunk is only defined by *three* surfaces at most: Top, north, and east. If interpreted as surfaces it doesn't really change anything; Since you can express a cube's left (or south)-facing side as the adjacent cube's right (or north)-facing side you get the same effect with a much smaller data structure.

[This visualization](Images/GND_SurfacesVisualization.png) might help understand the implications. In the picture, surfaces are colored as follows:

* Green if they're the TOP tile for a given cube
* Blue if they're NORTH
* Red if they're EAST

What this means is that, counter to intuition, the blue parts to the south of each chunks aren't really the south surface of the respective ground cube, but rather the north one of the neighbouring cube to the south. The "walls" are implicitly defined by the difference in both cubes' height vector and the client renders them according to which of the top tiles is higher, or not at all if the surface's aren't textured.

 A side effect is that the northernmost "cubes" of each map can't have a "northern" wall, nor can the westernmost "cubes" have a wall to the west. This is why every single map has a specially-crafted "border" beyond the actual visible "walls" (if there are any), which are black impassable tiles that are just sitting there and can't usually be seen in the game, as they blend in with the background.

In the GND files, you will merely find each corner's height and the overall scale factor, which is enough to render the geometry. You could do this by translating the positions to world coordinates and normalize the heights so they refer to a cube of width and height 1 (as in, "one unit in world coordinates"), or just make the cubes bigger to account for the scale factor and then "zoom out" farther to get the same perspective.

The geometry is then rendered by simply glueing all the tiles together, and walls are implicitly formed by two tiles that aren't on the same height: If there's a height difference there'll be a plane in between the two tiles; this essentially becomes a "wall" if assigning it a texture. However, this is only done if the neighbouring "cube" is higher or lower and has a textured surface of its own.

### The Normalizing Scale Factor

Each entity in the game world is assigned a "zoom" factor that is used to calculate its rendered size on the screen. For objects of type "Ground", this is always initialized with the value ``10``. Starting at version 1.6, it is overwritten with whatever value is stored in the map's GND file.

Since I haven't seen any map that used a different "zoom level" for its terrain, I have to assume they just kept the default value.

The actual calculation appears to be as follows:

    normalizingScaleFactor = GND.mapDimensions / GAT.mapDimensions * GND.geometryScaleFactor

Since each GND surface normally measures two GAT tiles, and the scale factor is seemingly always set to ten, this nets:

    normalizingScaleFactor = 1/2 * 10 = 1/5

 Therefore a constant scale factor of ``1/5`` should be correct for every map. Applying this factor scales the heights given by the height vectors of the GND file back to the standard coordinate system, with one tile being one world unit large.
## Lightmaps

A lightmap is used to add static light and shadow detail to each map, without requiring the client to calculate lighting in real time.

Similarly to the terrain's surface itself, the lightmap texture is sliced into unique parts, and each part must be mapped to the right surface on the assembled ground mesh. [This screenshot](Images/GND_LightmapSlices.png) might give you an idea of what to expect.

The process is otherwise similar to how the actual terrain is formed: Each surface references a slice of the lightmap texture, as well as a part of the regular (diffuse) texture, while each cube references up to three surfaces.

### Buffer Areas and Texture Bleeding

The visible white borders in that screenshot bring us to another phenomenon: Texture bleeding. If all the tiny slices were to be combined seamlessly, there could be visible artifacts from texture bleeding.

To avoid this problem, there's a one-pixel area to the north and east of each texture slice that isn't used directly. It serves to provide a buffer between the adjacent slices and removes or at least reduces the effect when texture filtering is applied.

In [this example](Images/GND_AntiBleedingBufferArea.bmp) I have manually merged two adjacent slices. The green squares mark the borders of the visible portion of each slice, with the areas outside being the "buffer".

> Some devs are still wondering why their shadowmaps look a bit weird. The reason is plain simple:
A lightmap consists (most of the time) of 8x8 tiles, where only the 7x7 pixels in the center are used. Nothing new. However, the tiles are combined into
a large texture. If texture filtering is being applied, then the borders of the different textures interpolate into each other, fatal for colormaps when they
have different colors. This is called texture bleeding. Because of this, Gravity added a padding of 1 pixel to each tile (resulting in 8x8, instead of 7x7)
and filled them with colors that still look nice when they are interpolated.

### Light and Shadow

Lastly, there isn't a single lightmap texture, but rather two: A "color map" that contains static lighting, and a "shadow map" that contains only greyscale data and is used to render shadows.

Example: [Color map](Images/GND_UnwrappedColorMap.png) vs [Shadow map](Images/GND_UnwrappedShadowMap.png)

The "shadow map" must be applied after the lighting calculation to avoid having it blended in with the other light sources, which would cause shadows to appear "washed out" or even invisible, depending on when in the lighting process the colors are multiplied with the shadow/alpha values.

I believe the client might simply use the alpha channel directly and store both in just one texture, since there's just one texture stored in the GND file and the ``/lightmap`` command seems to disable both parts, but this is merely an educated guess.

### Posterization

The client reduces the number of colors when processing the lightmap texture, causing visible artifacts. These are not part of the lightmap itself, but rather introduced deliberately when loading the texture.

I can only speculate as to why such a  "feature" exists, but my guess would be technical limitations or a stylistic choice. Either way, it is possible to render lighting in the way it was originally computed using just the information that's part of the GND file. This smoothes the transition between colors, as can be seen in the following comparison:

* [Here](Images/GND_ColorMapOriginal.png) are the lights of Comodo in their original glory
* And [here](Images/GND_ColorMapPosterized.png) they are again after applying the posterization effect with a "posterization level" (see below) of ``16``

Note the jagged appearance that plays a huge part in giving RO maps their distinctive look.

The effect is achieved by applying the following operation to the RGB values:

    r = (int)(r / LEVEL_COUNT) * LEVEL_COUNT
    g = (int)(g / LEVEL_COUNT) * LEVEL_COUNT
    b = (int)(b / LEVEL_COUNT) * LEVEL_COUNT
    In RO, LEVEL_COUNT is 16.

    For javascript it would be c = floor(c / LEVEL_COUNT) * LEVEL_COUNT;
    where c is each color component

This effectively casts the color value from float to int, reducing the amount of visible colors and thereby introducing the "jagged" transitions in the color gradient.

## Diffuse Colors (AKA Vertex Colors)

In order to give highlights to the terrain without requiring vast amounts of slightly different textures, the client can render specific (solid) colors at the corners of each tile to give this corner (and all adjacent ones) a different hue.

This concept is known as [vertex colors](https://gamedev.stackexchange.com/questions/139059/what-is-a-vertex-color) and it works by submitting additional information for a given point in 3D space that is then used by the hardware/GPU software to color it differently. It was widely used in older games where dynamic lighting wasn't feasible due to technical limitations, and it can have a significant visual impact for barely any effort at all:

Again they massively saved on file size by providing only one color value per tile, which is applied to the bottom left corner (vertex) of each tile and the vertices of all adjacent tiles that happen to be in the same position. With this, one can define colored spots on the corners of the tile grid with very little effort or overhead.

In [this basic rendition of pay_dun00](https://i.imgur.com/HWrzkEE.png) you can see the textured terrain with vertex colors applied (lightmaps, models, etc. are not displayed). They're the "blotches" on the ground, which blend in with the rest of the scene after all other effects are applied and give the terrain a lot of variety while still using a very limited set of textures.

> Each tile can have a diffuse color. This color, however, is not being applied to all four corners of a tile, but only to the bottom left vertex and all vertices that share the same coordinate.
>
## Layout

**TODO: Are there multiple versions? I've only ever seen one**

**TODO: Tables**
